# TVM linker

This repository stores the source code for tvm_linker utility. It takes TVM (https://test.ton.org/tvm.pdf) 
assembly source code of TON smart contract, compiles it and links its parts, adds standard selector 
and runtime and stores it into binary TVC file. Also, it can immediately execute a smart 
contract by emulating the computing phase of TON transaction.

TVM assembly can be generated by one of TONLabs compilers:
- TON solidity compiler (https://github.com/tonlabs/TON-Solidity-Compiler)
- C and C++ compiler for TVM (https://github.com/tonlabs/TON-Compiler)

## Prerequisites

- Latest version of Rust
- Cargo tool
[Get them here](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/getting-started/installation.html)

## How to build

```bash
$ cargo update && cargo build --release -j8
```

## How to use

tvm_linker has several modes of work:

### 1) Generating a ready-to-deploy contract.

```bash
$ tvm_linker compile [--lib <lib_file>] [--abi-json <abi_file>] [--genkey | --setkey <keyfile>] [-w <workchain_id>] [--debug] [--verbose] [--debug-map <debug_info_path>] <source>
```

Here `source` is a name of tvm assembly source file, `library` is a runtime library file (can be more than one: `--lib` 
should be supplied for every file). If `--lib` option is not specified linker looks for environment variable
`TVM_LINKER_LIB_PATH`, if it is set that path is used to load a library.

If there is an ABI file, it is better to use `--abi-json` option to supply a contract ABI file. Function ID's are
generated according to function signatures in the ABI. If neither `-a` nor `--abi-json` option is specified, linker
checks whether file `source`(without extension) + `.abi.json` exists. If file exists, linker loads ABI from it.

Linker generates the `<address>.tvc` file, where `<address>` is a hash from initial data and code of the contract.

Linker prints contract address in different formats: raw and user-friendly (testnet and mainnet). Define the workchain
ID option `-w` to generate proper user-friendly address. -1 is used by default.

To generate a new keypair and store the public key to the contract file:

```bash
$ tvm_linker compile <source> --genkey <key_file>
```

where `key_file` is a name of the file to store public and private keys. The linker will generate 2 files:
`key_file.pub` for public key and `key_file` for private key.

To load existing keypair use:

```bash
$ tvm_linker compile <source> --setkey <key_file>
```

While execution if option `--debug-map <debug_info_path>` is specified, this command can generate a debug info file, 
which contains mapping that can bind contract code with source files. This file can be used while debugging the
contract.

### 2) Decoding of .boc messages prepared externally.
To use this method, call

```bash
$ tvm_linker decode [--tvc] boc-file
```

If `--tvc` is omitted, `boc-file` is a file with a serialized message, otherwise it is a contract `tvc` file.

### 3) Preparing an external inbound messages in .boc format.

First, generate a contract as described in 1). Then use `message` subcommand to create external inbound message in boc
format:

```bash
$ tvm_linker message <contract-address> [--init] [--data] [-w]
$ tvm_linker message <contract-address> [--init] --abi-json <abi_file> --abi-method <method_name> --abi-params {json_with_params} [-w]
```

`contract-address` - the name of the compiled contract file without extension. The contract .tvc file should be placed in the current directory.

To create a `constructor message` with contract's code and data, use `--init` option.

Additionally, you can add a raw body to the message. Use the `--data` option:

```bash
$ tvm_linker message <contract-address> --data <data_string>
```

Instead of `<data_string>`, specify the necessary message body in hex format. 

Or make a message with ABI call using combination of options:
- `--abi-json <abi_file>` - path to a .json with contract interface described according to ABI specification;
- `--abi-method <method-name>` - name of the contract method to call;
- `--abi-params {<json-string-with-params>}` - arguments of the method declared in json like this: `{"arg_a": "0x1234", "arg_b": "x12345678"}`.

By default, -1 is used as a workchain id in contract address. To use another one, use `-w` option:

```bash
$ tvm_linker message -w 0
```

### 4) Emulating contract execution:

Linker can emulate compute phase of blockchain transaction. It is useful for contract debugging.

```bash
$ tvm_linker test <contract-address> --body XXXX... [--sign key-file] [--trace] [--decode-c6] [--internal <value>] [--src address] [--now unixtime] [-s source-file] [--balance <value>]
```

Loads contract from file by contract address `address` and emulates contract call sending external inbound message (by default) with body defined after `--body` parameter to the contract. `XXXX...` is a hex string. 

If `--sign` specified, the body will be signed with the private key from `key-file` file.

Use `--trace` flag to trace VM execution: stack, registers and gas will be printed after each executed VM command.

Use `--decode-c6` to see output actions in user-friendly format.

Use `--balance <value>` to define account balance in nanograms. It will be available  at the bottom of initial stake and in SmartContractInfo tuple from c7 register .

Use `--internal` to send internal message to the contract with defined nanograms in `value`. By default, source address in internal message in zero address (`0000...0000`), to define another address use option `--src <address>`, where address should be in the format <wc>:<bytes32> (i.e. "0:1122...AABB"). 

Account and message balance can have extended format with extra currencies: `{ "main": int, "extra": {"i": int, ...} }`.

Example: `--internal 100000 --src "0:6011b66a47238cf992f1033fe6aff00ce0f850df387ee92468d9c26b5564ba53"`

Use `--now <unixtime>` option to define transaction creation time. By default, current time is used.

Use `--bounced` flag to emulate bounced internal message, use this flag only with `--internal` option.

An ABI body can be generated if `abi-params`, `abi-json` and `abi-method` will be used instead of `--body XXXX...`.

If `--body` is used, contract's public function ids can be encoded by their names using `$...$` syntax:`$name:[0len][type]$`, 
where `name` is a name of public function, `len` - length in chars of the id (if `len` is bigger than `name`'s length in chars than 
zeros will be added on the left side to fit required length), `type` can be `x` or `X` - hexadecimal integer  in lowercase or uppercase. You have to set `-s source` option when you use $...$ syntax.

Example:

```bash
$ tvm_linker address test --body 00$main$ -s source //main id will be inserted as decimal string. Dont use this case, just as example
$ tvm_linker address test --body 00$main:08X$ -s source
$ tvm_linker address test --body 00$main:X$ -s source
$ tvm_linker address test --body 00$main:x$ -s source
```

The `--body-from-boc` option is analogous to `--body` but extracts the message body from the specified message boc file.

### 5) Initialize static variables in compiled contract

```bash
$ tvm_linker init <tvc_file> <data_json> <abi_file>
```

Updates contract's static state variables (see section `data` in `*.abi.json` file) with values
defined in `data_json` argument.

Example:

```bash
$ tvm_linker init contract.tvc '{"var1": 10}' contract.abi.json
```

### 6) Disassembler

There are a number of tools under the `disasm` umbrella:

`dump` outputs a pseudo-graphical representation of a tree of cells.
`text` disassembles a tvc produced by Solidity and FunC compilers.
`graphviz` produces an output in dot format for generation of graphical DAG representation of a tvc.

### More Help
Use `tvm_linker --help` for detailed description about all options, flags and subcommands.

## Input format

As a temporary measure, some LLVM-assembler like input is used. The source code should contain several function types:

- `.internal` - special functions, which are used only by contract's runtime. There are some wellknown internal functions:

	`main_external`, `main_internal`, `onTickTock`, `onBounce`.

## Support

Get more documents at docs.ton.dev and check our [YouTube Channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC9kJ6DKaxSxk6T3lEGdq-Gg) for tutorials. Stay tuned.
